git is a software and github is a service that is used to stor all what we are doing using git on cloud.

like github there are many service such as gitbucket.

role of git is to version control:track the changes in the file and if something wrong happens then we can trace back to it.it is used for checkpointing.

not every folder is being tracked by the git,ou need to initiliaze it so that it can be tracked by the git.

COMMAND1:
  "git status":to check the status ,if error intially then okayy.

  then go into the folder and write "git init"(one time per project)
  git init make a folder ".git" which is hidden to keep history of all files and sub-folders.

  "git add file_name" or "git add." to make everything add.
  "git commit -m "a message""

"git log" shows commit id and other inforation(such as author name,email id,date) of commits done.  

example

PS C:\Users\Anushka Garg\Desktop\fsd\github_practise> git log
commit e6b3fac902a9557de44cdd0a71fee4a2b44d4843 (HEAD -> master)
Author: Anushka Garg <your_github_email@example.com>
Date:   Wed Jun 10 12:53:59 2026 +0530

"git log --oneline"  shows the commit id

example

PS C:\Users\Anushka Garg\Desktop\fsd\github_practise> git log --oneline
e6b3fac (HEAD -> master) github guide

git config --global user.name "name of the user"
git config --global user.email "email"  

git config --global core.editor "code --wait"  (if you only want to write commit and use it in vs code rather than vim)

.env file is created to store the personal info
.gitignore file is created to include the file that we don't want to show to all on github

you can use gitignore generator to append most commmonly ignored file

"C:\Users\Anushka Garg\.gitconfig"(to see configuration file)

"git branch" (to see the branch current name)
"git checkout branchname" or "git switch branchname" (to switch the branch)

"git checkout -b dark-mode" (shortcut to create the branch as well as move into that simulataneously)

"git switch -c dark-mode"(same function as above)

"git branch -d navbar" (to delete a branch once it has been merged woth main branch and purpose has been fulfilled)

"ni navbar.html -ItemType File" (to create any file on a particular branch).

inside the .git folder :
1)head file points to the current branch
2)ref folder contains head file that contains ids of both branches and when you type "git log --oneline" you get the id of the current branch


for merging:
go on the master branch:
"git merge branchname" (to merge any branch on the master , no conflict occurs if there are different files)


when you work on different branch and have modified the same file after merging then a message will appear on that file ,remove upper section as well as lower section and keep the changes that you want to keep.after that add and commit the changes  (refer picture github2.png)  

git diff is usd to see the difference between two stages onto the same file.
"git diff --stages" (for the above action)

"git diff commit_id1 commit_id2" (diff between the two commits or stages)
"git diff branchname1 branchname2" (for diff between two branches);

"git diff commit_id1... commit_id2" (do same as "git diff commit_id1 commit_id2")

"git stash" is used to save the changes temporarily and go to some another branch without saving those changes to even staged stage.

to bring back the changes you need "git stash pop".

"git stashlist" to see the list of those chnages.

"git stash apply" to apply a particular change.

"git checkout commitid" to go back to some previous commit.
to rturn back to original commit from previous use "git checkout master or git riflog"


"git checkout head~2" to take head to 2 commits back.

"git remote add origin https://github.com/anushka1801/MyProject.git" (to add file tp github)
"git branch -M main"  (to rename the master branch)
"git push -u origin main" (to finally push the code)

to clone a repo "git clone url"

to contribute to an open sourse contribution:
1)open issue and write the issue 
2)fork the repo due to which it comes to our account
3)clone the repo
4)make the changes by creating a new branch
5)commit those changes
6)make got pull request
7)add detialed description
8)last make git pull



